Participant Rulebook
Introduction:
- A month-long program starting in December for students to start their journey in the
world of open source, the ONLY requirement being an enthusiastic heart to learn.
- Explore and find out your interests by contributing to projects from different fields: App,
Web, Design, Blockchain, Cybersecurity, and more!
- Countless projects designed and created from these fields that will be hosted on
GitHub for you to contribute to! Gain points, climb the leaderboard, and win exciting
rewards!
Pre-requirements
- Basic knowledge of Git/GitHub will help you contribute to the projects
easily, and,
- Nothing more! You will have to learn-and-apply as you progress through this month
filled with events! Ofcourse, knowledge of certain tech-stacks will give you an advantage,
but we recommend you to explore as much as you can!
- In addition to registration on Unstop, make sure you have registered at
https://events.geekhaven.in/ for the leaderboard tracking. If you haven't
registered then points can not be awarded.
How does OpenCode work?
The steps are very similar to contributing in any typical open-source
project. This will ensure that OpenCode can be an opening door for you to
contribute to bigger projects out there, and help you participate in events
such as GSoC.
Through OpenCode, you will not just gain experience working with new
technologies and open-source projects, but you will also get the chance to expand
your network by connecting with others who are more experienced in the
field.
There will be a number of projects (or repositories) hosted on the OpenCode
‘25 Organization in GitHub upon the commencement of the event. Each
project will have a number of issues rolling out with a certain frequency for
the entirety of the month. Each project will have 1-2 mentors assigned to
them, who will be responsible for handling those projects, and attending to
the queries/PRs of the participants in their projects.
The entire event is based on a leaderboard system, where participants gain
different amount of points based on the difficulty of the issue that they
complete.
These points will be predetermined and announced in advance to maximize
transparency. It will also be ensured that no one project has a lot more
tasks than the other projects; i.e., the points distribution between projects
will be kept uniform as best as possible.
There is no restriction to how many projects you can contribute to in the event.
You are free to explore all the projects, and contribute to all of them, the only
restriction being that you cannot have 3 first-come issues assigned to you
at any time across all repos in OpenCode ‘25 Organization (and only one
first-come issue per repo at a moment).
Rules:
1) Read a project:
There will be a tonne of projects hosted on GitHub. Open a project, read
through its README file, and understand what the project is about. If it
excites you, do not hold back from contributing to it!
2) Claim an Issue:
Each project will have multiple issues, or tasks, that you can choose to solve. The point is,
you don’t need to necessarily know how to complete the issue
beforehand! This will be your opening door to learn something new.
There will mainly be 3 kinds of issues:
a) Open-for-all issues (OFA): issues that do not require to be claimed. They
may have flexible time-frames. These issues can be solved by everyone,
and do not require to be claimed by anyone.
b) Competitive issues: These are the issues that can be tried by everyone
(without without requiring to be claimed), but only the best PR in terms of
quality and code will receive points. Selecting the best PR is up to the
mentor.
c) First-come issues: These are the issues that would be assigned to the person
who claims them first. You can only be assigned to 3 such issues at any
moment, across all repositories of the event (one issue per repo at any given
moment),
which means you can work on 3 repos at any moment, with one such issue
on each repo.
You will be given a time of 2 days to work on them, and an additional of
maximum 12 hours if the mentor allows it. Violating any of the rules or
spamming may result in points deduction or a ban from the Event.
If you’re not able to complete the issue within the given time-frame, you will
not be allowed to work on the same issue again. The next user to claim the
issue
once the issue is up-for-grabs will be assigned the issue, and the timer will
reset. This is irrespective of who was second to claim the issue originally.
- Arguing or misbehaving with the mentor relating to these tasks or issues
will penalize you.
- NOTE: the amount of points for each issue will vary depending on the
difficulty of the issue, and this will be decided and informed to you by the
mentor of that repository. Generally, OFA issues will have lesser points than
the Competitive or First-come issues, but this can vary.
3) Complete the issue:
After claiming the issue, now it’s time to explore ways on how to proceed with completing
the issue. Research ways to complete the issue, test them, and check to see which suits
the best! Make sure to read the issue well and solve all that the issue demands. If
something is not clear about the issue, get it clarified with the mentor of that repo
(repository) but do remember that the mentor is meant to guide you, not help you. They
can provide you with helpful resources should you require them.
4) CONTRIBUTING.md:
Each project may have a CONTRIBUTING.md file, that will enlist the necessary steps you
must take to contribute to that project/repo. If a PR (Pull Request) does not follow these
steps, it will not be accepted and you will not gain points. In case a project does not
contain a CONTRIBUTING.md file or similar, ensure that you get it clarified with the
mentors of that project.
5) Open a Pull Request (PR):
Once you’re confident with the changes you’ve made or the implementation that you’ve
done, it’s time to request for these changes to be incorporated into the project. Following
the template mentioned for that project, head over to GitHub and open a PR. Once done,
it’s time to wait until your changes are reviewed by a mentor.
It’s important to follow a few rules while opening the PR. Not following these
rules may result in your PR not being reviewed/accepted.
- It is a must to fork the repo to your account first. Once done, complete the task in your
fork (this step varies from repo-to-repo. Some may require you to create a new branch in
the fork). Having done this, you are set to make a PR to the project that you’re
contributing to. Make sure there are no merge conflicts.
- The PR title should be meaningful and relevant to the issue that it’s solving.
- All the PRs MUST have “Issue: #<issue_number>” (the # is not a typo. It is part of the
template) in the first line of the PR description. Not doing so WILL NOT update your
points in the leaderboard, even if it is accepted by the mentor. See the image below to
see what a “valid” PR looks like:
- If your PR is valid, you will get a message from our GitHub bot, saying that you’ve
followed the template. If you raise an invalid PR (not following the template), the bot will
warn you for the
same, and you will have to modify your PR accordingly. Contact a mentor ONLY
IF REQUIRED. The following images show what messages you may get:
1) Valid PR:
2) PR Merged:
3) Invalid PR:
- It is required for you to work on the same PR if any changes are suggested (i.e., modify
the invalid template to make it valid, or any other changes). You should not close the PR
and create a new one, unless the mentor asks for it. Any further changes in that PR must
be done within that PR.
The mentor may suggest changes to be made and once satisfied, will accept your PR to be
merged into the project, helping you gain valuable points.
FAQs:
1) What if I get some query regarding the issue I’m assigned to? Where
can I seek help from the mentor?
- You can either message the mentor on the thread of that issue, or more
preferably, ping any of the mentors in the Discord channel corresponding to
that project. It is a must for all the participants to join the Discord Server
of OpenCode
- The mentor may also link resources that may help you solve a particular
issue. These resources will be accessible only through the discord server,
to ensure transparency to other participants, and accessibility to those
resources by others as well.
2) How do I know when an issue is opened? What are the chances of
me being assigned an issue, as others may claim it before me?
- You can “watch” the repository that you’re interested in, so that you get
notifications by mail when some new activity happens in that repository.
You also receive updates in the Discord server when a new issue is
opened in a repository. You will have to stay on the watch for new
issues.
- There will also be open-for-all issues that can be contributed to by
everyone, in case you are not able to find time to claim an issue.
3) I feel that someone is cheating/misusing the rules to gain points, or
someone is purposely claiming issues without solving them. What should I
do?
- Your first point of contact for any problems would be the mentor of that
repository if it is related to some project. We will make sure that every
participant has a fair participation in OpenCode. Any miscreants found will
strictly be penalized,
and may even be restricted from participating in further OpenCode events.
You can also ping any mentor in the Discord server if the specific mentor of that
repository is NA.
- Do not take the matter in your own hands. It is our responsibility to look into
it. Be sure to be ethical at all times, to avoid getting penalized yourself.
What next?
Well, that’s what you’re gonna have to do for the entire month! Scout for projects,
claim issues, solve them, and climb the leaderboard. These contributions will help
you step into the real world of open-source out there by prepping you with some
fancy tech- stacks, and more importantly, ethics and practices to be followed.
Check out the GitHub page of OpenCode to view past projects, and learn more about it! Do
follow GeekHaven on your socials to stay updated with the event. See you there!
Join the Discord server of OpenCode!
GitHub (OpenCode)
Instagram
(GeekHaven) LinkedIn
(GeekHaven) X
(GeekHaven)
Facebook (GeekHaven)
GeekHaven's Website