MACHINE LEARNING STUDY MATERIAL,

MODULE I:

Definitions of Machine Learning

™* Machine Learningis the science (and art) of programming computers so they
can learn from data.

% Machine Learning is the field of study that gives computers the ability to learn
without being explicitly programmed.

* Acomputer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some task
T and some performance measure P, if its performance on T, as measured by P,
improves with experience E.

Need to use Machine Learning

Machine Learning is great for:

# Problems for which existing solutions require a lot of hand-tuning or long lists of
rules: one Machine Learning algorithm can often simplify code and perform better.

Eg: writing traditional programming vs machine learning approach for a spam filter:

Traditional programming for spam filter detection

Machine Learning approach for spam filter detection

In traditional programming, one writes a detection algorithm for each of the patterns that
you noticed, and the program would flag emails as spam if a number of these patterns are
detected. Since the problem is not trivial, your program will likely become a long list of
complex rules—pretty hard to maintain. In contrast, a spam filter based on Machine
Learning techniques automatically learns which words and phrases are good predictors
of spam by detecting unusually frequent patterns of words in the spam examples
compared to the ham examples. The program is much shorter, easier to maintain, and
most likely more accurate.

~

~

DEPT AUREL .-JARCE

Complex problems for which there is no good solution at all using a traditional
approach: the best Machine Learning techniques can find a solution.

Machine Learning shines is for problems that either are too complex for traditional
approaches or have no known algorithm. For example, consider speech recognition:
say you want to start simple and write a program capable of distinguishing the words
“one” and “two.” You might notice that the word “two" starts with a high-pitch sound
("T"), so you could hardcode an algorithm that measures high-pitch sound intensity
and use that to distinguish ones and twos. Obviously this technique will not scale to
thousands of words spoken by millions of very different people in noisy environments
and in dozens of languages. The best solution (at least today) is to write an algorithm
that learns by itself, given many example recordings for each word.

Fluctuating environments: a Machine Learning system can adapt to new data.

Ez: In the spam filter detection example, if spammers notice that all their emails
containing "4U" are blocked, they might start writing “For U" instead. A spam filter
using traditional programming techniques would need to be updated to flag “For U"
emails. If spammers keep working around your spam filter, you will need to keep
writing new rules forever. In contrast, a spam filter based on Machine Learning
techniques automatically notices that “For U" has become unusually frequent in spam
flagged by users, and it starts flagging them without your intervention.

ha