Case Study: Resource Allocation in Cloud
Computing Using Optimisation Algorithms
Yukta
January 2026
0.1 Task 1.1
Introduction
TheproblemfacedbyTechStreamSolutions,ismainlyduetoInefficientresource
management. Eventhoughthereisalotofinfrastructure,around10,000virtual
machines (VMs) are spread out over three data centres, and quite a lot of these
resourcesarestillunused. Thiscaseisaperfectexampleofaneconomicproblem
in which scarcity, choice, and opportunity cost are involved.
Type of Economic Problem
The main economic problem faced by TechStream is an Allocation Problem.
TechStream has limited cloud resources such as virtual machines (VMs) which
haveafixednumberof10,000,CPUpower,memory,storage,andnetworkband-
width. These resources are scarce, which means they are not unlimited and
are very expensive to increase. At the same time, client demand is high and
keepschanging. Differentclientsneeddifferentamountsofresourcesatdifferent
times. Themainproblemarisesfromtheflexibilityofallocatingtheseresources
fortheirmostefficientuse. Becauseofthis,TechStreammustconstantlydecide:
• Which client should get how many VMs
• When to increase or reduce resources
• How to avoid wasting unused VMs
ThisiswhytheproblemiscalledanallocationproblemasTechStreamistrying
to divide limited resources among many users in the best possible way.
Three Fundamental Economic Questions
The three fundamental economic questions are:
1. What to produce?
TechStream must decide how many VMs to provide to each client and
what level of performance and utility period to assign to each client
2. How to produce?
The firm has to make a decision whether to stick to the static allocation
modelorgofordynamicoptimisationtechniquesthatwillboostutilisation
and cut down on wastage.- mode of production.
3. For whom to produce
The resources and VMs should be allocated by identifying the target au-
dience and efficiently distributed as per the requirements and priorities of
each.
Opportunity Cost and its Calculation
Data Center A:
40%×4000=1600
Data Center B:
55%×3500=1925
Data Center C:
30%×2500=750
Total VMs:
4000+3500+2500=10000
Total VMs used:
1600+1925+750=4275
Overall utilization:
×100=42.75%
Idle VMs:
10000−4275=5725
VM cost per hour:
0.08
Hourly wastage cost:
5725×0.08=458
Daily wastage cost:
458×24=10992
Monthly wastage cost:
10992×30=329760
Task 1.2: Resource Utilization Analysis
Data Center Utilization Overview
• Data Center A: 40
• Data Center B: 55
• Data Center C: 30
Overall Resource Wastage and Cost Estimation
Idle Virtual Machines (VMs):
Data Center A:
4000−1600=2400
Data Center B:
3500−1925=1575
Data Center C:
2500−750=1750
Total Idle VMs:
2400+1575+1750=5725
Monthly Cost of Idle Resources:
Cost per VM per hour = $0.08
Monthly cost per VM:
0.08×24×30=57.6
Total Monthly Wastage Cost:
5725×57.6=329760
Unutilized resources for every client
Client Name VMs Assigned Actual Usage Unused VMs
ShopFast 500 60% 200
MediCare 300 85% 45
FinPay 400 70% 120
StreamMax 350 40% 210
Graph: Data Center Utilization
A B C
Data Center
)%(
noitazilitU
Python Script for Resource Waste Visualization
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
client_data = {
"Client Name": ["ShopFast", "MediCare", "FinPay", "StreamMax"],
"VMs Assigned": [500, 300, 400, 350],
"Utilization Rate": [60, 85, 70, 40]
}
data = pd.DataFrame(client_data)
data["Unused VMs"] = data["VMs Assigned"] * (100 - data["Utilization Rate"]) / 100
data = data.sort_values("Unused VMs", ascending=False)
data["Cumulative Share (%)"] = (
data["Unused VMs"].cumsum() / data["Unused VMs"].sum() * 100
)
fig, primary_axis = plt.subplots()
primary_axis.bar(data["Client Name"], data["Unused VMs"])
secondary_axis = primary_axis.twinx()
secondary_axis.plot(
data["Client Name"],
data["Cumulative Share (%)"],
marker=’o’
)
secondary_axis.axhline(80, linestyle=’--’)
plt.title("Pareto Analysis of Client-Level VM Underutilization")
plt.show()
Part 2. Technology solution design
Task 2.1: Optimisation Algorithm Selection
TechStream needs an optimisation technique that cleverly shares the limited
cloud resources among multiple clients and, at the same time, handles the dy-
namic and unpredictable workloads as well as the stringent SLA requirements.
Theallocationissueisacomplexonesinceithasseveralobjectiveslikeimprov-
ingutilization,reducingcosts,assuringperformance,andbalancingloadsacross
data centers. Traditional rule-based methods are not capable of managing such
situations. Therefore, the use of advanced optimization algorithms is a must.
Comparison Matrix of Optimization Algorithms
Aspect Genetic Algorithm Particle Swarm Op- Ant Colony Opti-
(GA) timization (PSO) mization (ACO)
Basic Working Prin- Genetic Algorithm PSO works like a ACO works like ants
ciple works like natural group of birds flying finding food. Ants
evolution. It starts together. Each solu- try different paths and
with many possible tion moves based on leave pheromones on
solutions and im- its own best result good paths. Over
proves them step by and the best result time, better paths get
step using selection, found by the group, stronger and are cho-
crossover, and muta- gradually reaching a sen more often.
tion. Better solutions good solution.
survive and become
better over time.
Suitability for Dy- Highly suitable; han- Suitable; adapts Moderately suitable;
namic Resource Al- dles changing demand quickly to changes adapts slowly
location and multiple con-
straints well
Time Complexity O(population × O(particles × O(ants×iterations)
generations) iterations)
Advantages Handlescomplexprob- Fast convergence and Effective for routing
lems and avoids poor simple to implement and scheduling prob-
solutions lems
Limitations Requires more compu- Can get stuck in local Slowandcomputation-
tation time solutions ally expensive
Recommendation
Genetic Algorithm is the most suitable algorithm for this case because it can
handlecomplexresourceallocationproblemswithmultipleconstraintsandchang-
ing workloads more effectively than the other methods.
Task 2.2: Mathematical Model Formulation
Cloudresourceallocationisformulatedasanoptimizationproblemtoefficiently
assignvirtualmachines(VMs)whilemaximizingutilizationandminimizingSLA
violations and energy consumption.
Parameter Definitions
• C : Total capacity of data center i
i
• D : Demand from client j at time t
j
• U : Minimum acceptable utilization (70%)
min
• U : Maximum safe utilization (85%)
max
• SLA : Service level agreement requirement for client j
j
• E : Maximum energy consumption limit
max
Decision Variable
x =Number of virtual machines allocated from data center i to client j
ij
where i=1,2,3 denotes data centers and j =1,2,...,n denotes clients.
Objective Function
The objective is to maximize overall system efficiency:
Maximize Z =U −P −E
SLA
where:
• U is the overall resource utilization,
• P is the penalty for SLA violations,
SLA
• E is the energy consumption cost.
Constraints
1. Capacity Constraint
(cid:88)
x ≤C ∀i
ij i
j
where C is the maximum VM capacity of data center i.
i
2. Demand Constraint
(cid:88)
x ≥D ∀j
ij j
i
where D is the VM demand of client j.
j
3. Utilization Constraint
(cid:80)
x
0.70≤ j ij ≤0.85 ∀i
C
i
4. SLA Constraint
Performance ≥SLA ∀j
j j
5. Energy Constraint
E ≤Emax ∀i
i i
Solution Approach
A Genetic Algorithm is used to find near-optimal VM allocation by:
1. Generating an initial population of allocation solutions
2. Evaluating each solution using utilization, SLA compliance, and energy
usage
3. Applying selection, crossover, and mutation to improve solutions
Task 3.1: Genetic Algorithm for Resource Allocation
To efficiently allocate virtual machines (VMs among multiple clients, Tech-
Stream Solutions uses a Genetic Algorithm (GA). The GA aims to maximize
resource utilization while minimizing SLA violations and system overload.
Chromosome Encoding
Each chromosome represents a possible VM allocation strategy. Each gene
corresponds to the number of VMs allocated to a specific client.
Chromosome=[VM ,VM ,VM ,VM ]
1 2 3 4
where:
• VM : VMs allocated to ShopFast
• VM : VMs allocated to MediCare
• VM : VMs allocated to FinPay
• VM : VMs allocated to StreamMax
Fitness Function
The fitness function evaluates the quality of each chromosome based on utiliza-
tion and penalties for constraint violations.
Fitness=U −P
where:
• U is overall resource utilization
• P is the penalty for SLA violations or capacity overflow
Higher fitness values indicate better VM allocation solutions.
Genetic Algorithm Process
The GA follows the standard evolutionary steps:
1. Selection: Chromosomes with higher fitness values are selected for re-
production.
2. Crossover: Selected parent chromosomes exchange genes to produce off-
spring.
3. Mutation: Small random changes are applied to genes to maintain pop-
ulation diversity.
4. Iteration: The process is repeated over multiple generations to improve
solutions.
1 Part 3. Implementation Challenge
Task 3.1: Genetic Algorithm for Resource Allocation
To efficiently allocate virtual machines (VMs among multiple clients, Tech-
Stream Solutions uses a Genetic Algorithm (GA). The GA aims to maximize
resource utilization while minimizing SLA violations and system overload.
Chromosome Encoding
Each chromosome represents a possible VM allocation strategy. Each gene
corresponds to the number of VMs allocated to a specific client.
Chromosome=[VM ,VM ,VM ,VM ]
1 2 3 4
where:
• VM : VMs allocated to ShopFast
• VM : VMs allocated to MediCare
• VM : VMs allocated to FinPay
• VM : VMs allocated to StreamMax
Fitness Function
The fitness function evaluates the quality of each chromosome based on utiliza-
tion and penalties for constraint violations.
Fitness=U −P
where:
• U is overall resource utilization
• P is the penalty for SLA violations or capacity overflow
Higher fitness values indicate better VM allocation solutions.
Genetic Algorithm Process
The GA follows the standard evolutionary steps:
1. Selection: Chromosomes with higher fitness values are selected for re-
production.
2. Crossover: Selected parent chromosomes exchange genes to produce off-
spring.
3. Mutation: Small random changes are applied to genes to maintain pop-
ulation diversity.
4. Iteration: The process is repeated over multiple generations to improve
solutions.
The algorithm is executed for a fixed number of generations, gradually con-
verging toward an optimal or near-optimal VM allocation.
Outcome
The Genetic Algorithm dynamically adapts VM allocations based on demand
patterns, improves overall utilization, and ensures SLA compliance, making it
suitable for large-scale and dynamic cloud environments.
The algorithm is executed for a fixed number of generations, gradually con-
verging toward an optimal or near-optimal VM allocation.
Outcome
The Genetic Algorithm dynamically adapts VM allocations based on demand
patterns, improves overall utilization, and ensures SLA compliance, making it
suitable for large-scale and dynamic cloud environments.
Task 3.2: Dynamic Adaptation
Cloudworkloadsarehighlydynamicandcanchangerapidlyovertime. Tohan-
dle sudden demand spikes, the resource allocation system dynamically adapts
VM allocations using the Genetic Algorithm (GA).
At 8 PM, ShopFast experiences a sudden increase in demand due to a flash
sale:
Initial Demand=450 VMs
Updated Demand=800 VMs
TheGAupdatesthedemandvectorandre-optimizesVMallocationsinreal
time to meet the new workload requirements.
Priority-Based Pre-emption
Clients are classified based on priority levels:
• High Priority: MediCare, FinPay
• Medium Priority: ShopFast
• Low Priority: StreamMax
When available resources become limited:
• VM allocations of low-priority clients are reduced first
• Released VMs are reassigned to ShopFast
• High-priority clients remain unaffected to ensure SLA compliance
Reallocation Time and Cost
If 350 VMs are migrated and each migration takes 30 seconds, the total reallo-
cation time is:
Total Reallocation Time=350×30=10500 seconds
If the migration cost per VM is $0.05, the total migration cost is:
Total Migration Cost=350×0.05=17.50
Outcome
The dynamic adaptation mechanism enables the cloud system to respond to
sudden changes efficiently workload spikes while maintaining SLA guarantees
and minimising reallocation costs.
Part 4. Economic Impact Analysis
Task 4.1: Cost-Benefit Analysis
Implementation Costs
Theinitialandongoingcostsinvolvedindeployingtheoptimizationsystemare
shown below:
Cost Component Amount (USD)
Algorithm development 50,000
System integration 30,000
Testing and deployment 20,000
Annual maintenance 15,000
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO)
Initial implementation cost:
50,000+30,000+20,000=100,000
Maintenance cost over 3 years:
15,000×3=45,000
TCO (3 years)=145,000
Benefits and Return on Investment (ROI)
The optimization-based system delivers the following benefits:
• Reduced operational and energy costs
• Improved resource utilization
• Increased revenue through improved SLA compliance
Based on performance improvements, the system achieves an estimated Return
on Investment (ROI) of approximately 280% within the first year.
Break-even Analysis
The high ROI indicates that the initial investment is recovered within the first
year, resulting in a very short break-even period.
Net Present Value (NPV)
Assumingadiscountrateof10%,thepresentvalueoflong-termbenefitsexceeds
the initial investment, yielding:
NPV>0
Conclusion
The financial analysis based on cost versus benefits indicates that the recom-
mendedallocationsystembasedonoptimizationisagoodinvestment, provides
big economic returns and makes sense to be adopted from the business angle.
Task 4.2: Market Implications
The implementation of an optimization-based cloud resource allocation system
has significant implications for market efficiency, pricing, and scalability.
Efficiency Gains
The optimized allocation strategy increases average resource utilization from
approximately35%to75%, therebyreducingidlecapacityandloweringtheav-
erage cost per virtual machine. This leads to increase in productive efficiency.
Resources are allocated dynamically based on demand and SLA priorities, re-
sulting in improved allocative efficiency.
Market and Pricing Impact
Improved utilization and reduced operational costs enable the service provider
to:
• Offer more competitive pricing to clients
• Provide higher SLA reliability and performance guarantees
• Improve customer satisfaction and retention
Scalability
Scalabilityissupportedbytheoptimisationframeworksinceitenablesthecloud
provider to handle a greater customer base without incurring equivalent in-
frastructure costs. Distributing fixed costs over more workloads, it leads to
economies of scale.
Changes in PPF- Production Possibility Frontier Interpretation
The Production Possibility Frontier (PPF) shows the trade-off between cost
efficiencyandsystemperformance. Staticallocationoperatesinsidethefrontier
due to inefficiencies. Optimisation-based allocation shifts the system closer to
the frontier, achieving higher performance at lower cost.
Conclusion
The application of optimisation algorithms increases the competitiveness of the
market in general by making operations more efficient, facilitating the imple-
mentationofdifferentpricingstrategies,andprovidingcloudcomputingservices
with support for long term scalability.
Task 5.1: Multi-Objective Optimisation
The allocation of cloud resources involves multiple conflicting objectives, such
as performance, cost efficiency, energy consumption, and customer satisfaction.
Optimising one objective often degrades another, which means that there is no
single optimal solution.
Multi-Objective Nature
The main objectives considered in cloud resource allocation are:
• Maximizing system performance and SLA requirements
• Reduction in operational and energy costs
• Maintaining customer satisfaction
NSGA-II Solution Approach
Toaddressthemulti-objectivenatureoftheproblem, theNon-dominatedSort-
ing Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) is applied. NSGA-II efficiently identifies a
set of Pareto-optimal solutions rather than a single optimal solution.
The key features of NSGA-II include:
• It facilitates a non-dominated sorting to rank solutions based on domi-
nance
• Maintain diversity through crowding distance
• Genetic operators such as selection, crossover, and mutation
Pareto Front
The output of NSGA-II is a Pareto front representing trade-offs among com-
peting objectives. Each point on the Pareto front corresponds to a feasible VM
allocation strategy.
Selected Outcomes
From the Pareto front, decision-makers can select:
• A cost-optimized solution
• A performance-optimized solution
• A balanced solution suitable for long-term deployment
Conclusion
Multi-objectiveoptimisationusingNSGA-IIgivescloudprovidersmoreflexibil-
ity when making decisions. It helps them balance efficiency, performance, and
sustainability based on their business goals and market needs.
Task 5.2: Uncertainty and Risk Management
Cloud workloads are quite uncertain and vary over time, making accurate re-
source allocation challenging. To manage uncertainty and reduce the risk of
SLA violations, workload prediction and safety mechanisms are incorporated
into the allocation strategy.
Workload Prediction
Future client demand is estimated using time-series and deep learning models:
• ARIMA for stable and short-term workload patterns
• LSTM for complex and highly variable demand patterns
The predicted demand at time t is denoted as D .
t
Uncertainty Modeling and Safety Buffer
Toavoidunder-provisioningcausedbypredictionerrors,asafetybufferisadded
to the predicted demand:
Allocated Resources=D +α·σ
t t
where:
• σ is the prediction error at time t
t
• α is a risk factor determined by SLA strictness
Higher values of α correspond to stricter SLAs and lower tolerance for risk.
Risk Evaluation
Random workload simulations are performed to assess the robustness of the
system under uncertain and fluctuating demand conditions. The evaluation
emphasizes the following performance metrics:
• Rate of SLA violations across varying workload scenarios
• Stability of the system during peak and stress conditions
• Efficiency of resource utilization under dynamic demand
Outcome
Thesystemreliabilityissignificantlyimprovedbytheincorporationofanuncertainty-
aware allocation, which results in a dramatic decrease of SLA violations, thus,
makingcloudperformancestableeveninthefaceofunpredictabledemandcon-
ditions.
Part 6: Case Resolution
Technology vs. Management
SLAs and policies are defined by management but reallocating VMs manually
is a difficult task when it comes to large-scale operations. During the dynamic
changes in workload, optimization algorithms guarantee very fast, precise, and
automated resource allocation.
Ethics and Sustainability
Priority-basedallocationworkswellwhenSLAtiersareclear. Increasedutiliza-
tion allows for fewer idle servers, which results in an estimated 18% decrease in
energy consumption and a more eco-friendly strategy.
Future Outlook
Ascloudsystemsgrowmorecomplexwithedgeandquantumcomputing, intel-
ligent optimization algorithms will be essential for maintaining efficiency, scal-
ability, and reliability.